Core Plugin API (#455)
pupil-labs/pupil-docs: src/developer/core/plugin-api.md

* Records video and data.
Most, and preferably all coordination and control happens within the World process.

### Player Process
Main process within Pupil Player.

* Visualizes recorded data
* Performs post-hoc analyses
* Exports video and csv data

## API Reference

Plugins are the recommended way to extend Pupil Core software functionality. They are
typically managed within the application's main process which communicates with the
plugins via callbacks (see below). These are defined in the root
[`Plugin` class](https://github.com/pupil-labs/pupil/blob/master/pupil_src/shared_modules/plugin.py).
In order to create a new plugin, one has to inherit from this class and overwrite them
as desired.

```py
from plugin import Plugin

class MyCustomPlugin(Plugin):
    pass
```

Plugins are automatically listed in the [Plugin Manager](/core/software/pupil-capture/#plugins)
unless they inherit from a set of special classes (`System_Plugin_Base`, `Base_Manager`,
`Base_Source`, `CalibrationChoreographyPlugin`, `GazerBase`).

### Plugin class attributes

These class attributes define general plugin behavior. Overwriting them is optional but

> recommneded. `alive` is an exception and should only be set to `False` if you want the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recommended. `alive` is an exception and should only be set to `False` if you want the
```

plugin to close autonomously. Otherwise, this attribute is managed by the enclosing
application.

| Name         | Possible values                                                                                        | Default value | Meaning                                                              |
|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `uniqueness` | `"not_unique"`, `"by_class"`, `"by_base_class"`                                                        | `"by_class"`  | Plugin instance replacement behavior                                 |

Reviewer: I think uniqueness would benefit from a slightly more detailed explanation of 'Meaning'

| `deinit_ui(self)`                  | Called before `cleanup` and the calling process provides a user interface. The plugin is responsible for removing any UI elements added in `init_ui`.                                                                                                                                                                               |
| `get_init_dict(self)`              | Called on each active plugin instance on application shutdown. Returns a dictionary which is stored in the application's persistent session settings. On the next application launch, all previously active plugins will be restored by calling `__init__` and passing the dictionary as the `kwargs` arguments. See example below. |

Session settings example:
```python
from plugin import Plugin

class MyCustomPlugin(Plugin):
    def __init__(self, g_pool, my_custom_setting=5):

>         self._my_custom_setting = my_custom_setting

Reviewer: I like these code snippets. Can we include some notes in the code that show an example of what a user might want to save? E.g. are they saving GUI elements (slider values etc.) or other things such as custom functions run on gaze datums, or both?

    def get_init_dict(self):
        return {"my_custom_setting": self._my_custom_setting}
        # return {}  # on next launch, recover plugin with default settings
        # raise NotImplementedError  # on next launch, do not recover plugin
```

| Processing callbacks            | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `recent_events(self, events)`   | Called once per application event cycle. `events` is a dictionary with string-keys and built-in python typed values, e.g. lists, dicts, etc. Plugins can add new entries to propagate data to plugins with higher `order`. Entries are stored to their corresponding [`.pldata`](/developer/core/recording-format/#pldata-files) files during recording and published on the [IPC backend](/developer/core/network-api/#ipc-backbone-message-forma). |

Reviewer: Can we clarify what an application event cycle is here?

| `on_char(self, character)`                  | Gets called on char events that were not consumed by the GUI.          Return True if the event was consumed and should not be propagated         to any other plugin.          See http://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/input_guide.html#input_char for         more information char events. |
| `on_drop(self, paths)`                      | Gets called on dropped paths of files and/or directories on the window.          Return True if the event was consumed and should not be propagated         to any other plugin.          See http://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/input_guide.html#path_drop for         more information.    |
| `on_window_resize(self, window, w, h)`      | Gets called when user resizes window                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

### Plugin utility methods

> In addition to the callbacks, the plugin implements a series of useful function to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the callbacks, the plugin implements a series of useful functions to
```

| `icon_font`  | `"roboto"`, `"pupil_icons"`, `"opensans"`, any other font registered via `Plugin.g_pool.ui.add_font()` | `"roboto"`    | Menu icon font                                                       |
| `icon_chr`   | Any string whose letters are present in `icon_font`. Recommended to use a single letter string.        | `"?"`         | Menu icon                                                            |
| `alive`      | `True`, `False`                                                                                        | `True`        | Setting to `False` will shutdown the plugin in the next event cycle. |

#### Plugin uniqueness
- *not unique* - plugins can be instantiated multiple times, e.g. gaze visualization
plugins
- *unique by class* - only one plugin instance can exist at a time, e.g. blink
detector
- *unique by base class* - if two  plugins share the same base class they are only
allowed to be active one at a time. For example, each calibration choreography is

> implemented as a separate *by-base-class*-unique plugin but since they all share the

Reviewer: What is *by-base-class*-unique? Is this equivalent to *unique by base class*?
Would it be better to say, "if two plugins share the same base class, they are only allowed to be active one at a time. Calibration choreographies are examples of *unique by base class* plugins. They each implement a different choreography, but share the same base class (`CalibrationChoreographyPlugin`). As such, only one can be active at a time."

> - *unique by base class* - if two  plugins share the same base class they are only
> allowed to be active one at a time. For example, each calibration choreography is
> implemented as a separate *by-base-class*-unique plugin but since they all share the
> same base class (`CalibrationChoreographyPlugin`) only one can be active at a time.

Author: I like the suggestion!
```suggestion
- *unique by base class* - if two  plugins share the same base class they are only
allowed to be active one at a time. Calibration choreographies are examples of *unique by base class* plugins.
They each implement a separate *by-base-class*-unique plugin but since they all share the
same base class (`CalibrationChoreographyPlugin`) only one can be active at a time.
```

| `deinit_ui(self)`                  | Called before `cleanup` and the calling process provides a user interface. The plugin is responsible for removing any UI elements added in `init_ui`.                                                                                                                                                                               |
| `get_init_dict(self)`              | Called on each active plugin instance on application shutdown. Returns a dictionary which is stored in the application's persistent session settings. On the next application launch, all previously active plugins will be restored by calling `__init__` and passing the dictionary as the `kwargs` arguments. See example below. |

A typical use case of the session settings is to persistently store plugin parameters,
e.g. the minimum duration parameter of the fixation detector.

The code below shows how to store a custom value (`my_custom_setting`) in the session
settings. `my_custom_setting=5` defines the default value in case no session settings
were found when the application was started or the plugin has just been enabled. If

> session settings were loaded successfully the class will be instanciated with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
session settings were loaded successfully the class will be instantiated with the
```

|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `on_click(self, pos, button, action)`       | Gets called when the user clicks in the window screen and the event has not been consumed by the GUI. Return `True` if the event was consumed and should not be propagated to any other plugin.                                                                                           |
| `on_pos(self, pos)`                         | Gets called when the user moves the mouse in the window screen.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

> | `on_key(self, key, scancode, action, mods)` | Gets called on key events that were not consumed by the GUI.  Return `True` if the event was consumed and should not be propagated to any other plugin.  See http://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/input_guide.html#input_key for more information key events.                                  |

Reviewer: Shall we have the glfw links as in-text links in keeping with the rest of the docs?

Author: ```suggestion
| `on_key(self, key, scancode, action, mods)` | Gets called on key events that were not consumed by the GUI.  Return `True` if the event was consumed and should not be propagated to any other plugin.  See [the GLFW documentation](http://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/input_guide.html#input_key) for more information on key events.       |
```
